%%%
    title = "Sieve Email Filtering: delivery by mailboxid"
    abbrev = "Sieve MAILBOXID"
    category = "std"
    docName = "draft-ietf-extra-sieve-mailboxid-08"
    updates = [5228]
    ipr= "trust200902"
    area = "Applications"
    workgroup = "EXTRA"
    keyword = ["sieve", "email"]

    date = 2021-03-16T00:00:00Z

    [seriesInfo]
    name="Internet-Draft"
    value="draft-ietf-extra-sieve-mailboxid-08"
    stream="IETF"
    status="standard"

    [[author]]
    initials="B."
    surname="Gondwana"
    fullname="Bron Gondwana"
    role="editor"
    organization = "Fastmail"
        [author.address]
        email = "brong@fastmailteam.com"
        uri = "https://www.fastmail.com"
        [author.address.postal]
            street = "Level 2, 114 William St"
            city = "Melbourne"
            code = "VIC 3000"
            country = "Australia"
%%%

.# Abstract

The OBJECTID capability of the IMAP protocol (RFC8474) allows clients to
identify mailboxes by a unique identifier which survives rename.

This document extends the Sieve mail filtering language (RFC5228) to
allow using that same unique identifier as a target for fileinto rules,
and for testing the existance of mailboxes.

{mainmatter}

# Introduction

[@!RFC5228] Sieve rules are sometimes created using graphical interfaces
which allow users to select the mailbox to be used as a target for a rule.

If that mailbox is renamed, the client may also update its internal
representation of the rule and update the sieve script to match,
however this is a multi-step process and subject to partial failures.
Also, if the folder is renamed by a different mechanism (e.g. another
IMAP client) the rules will get out of sync.

By telling "fileinto" to reference the immutable mailboxid specified
by [@!RFC8474], using the extension specified herein, sieve rules can
continue to target the same mailbox even if it gets renamed.

# Conventions Used In This Document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
"MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 [@!RFC2119] [@!RFC8174] when, and only when,
they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

# Sieve capability string

Scripts which use the following extensions MUST explicitly require
the capability "mailboxid".

Example:

```
require "mailboxid";
```

# Argument ":mailboxid" to Command "fileinto"

Normally, the "fileinto" command delivers the message in the mailbox
specified using its positional mailbox argument.  However, if the
optional ":mailboxid" argument is also specified, the "fileinto"
command first checks whether a mailbox exists in the user's personal
namespace [@!RFC2342] with the specified [@!RFC8474] MAILBOXID.

If a matching mailbox is found, that mailbox is used for delivery.

If there is no such mailbox, the "fileinto" action proceeds as it would
without the ":mailboxid" argument.

The tagged argument `:mailboxid` to fileinto consumes one additional token,
a string with the objectid of the mailbox to file into.

Example:
```
require "fileinto";
require "mailboxid";

if header :contains ["from"] "coyote" {
    fileinto :mailboxid "F6352ae03-b7f5-463c-896f-d8b48ee3"
             "INBOX.harassment";
}
```

## Interaction with "mailbox" extension

For servers which also support the [@!RFC5490] mailbox extension, if both the
":create" and ":mailboxid" arguments are provided to a "fileinto" command and
no matching mailbox is found, then a new mailbox will be created.

This new mailbox will have the name specified by the positional mailbox
argument ([RFC5228] section 4.1), however it will get a different mailboxid
(chosen by the server) rather than the one specified by the ":mailboxid"
argument to fileinto.

Example:
```
require "fileinto";
require "mailboxid";
require "mailbox";

fileinto :mailboxid "Fnosuch"
         :create
         "INBOX.no-such-folder";
            # creates INBOX.no-such-folder, but it doesn't
            # get the "Fnosuch" mailboxid.
```

## Interaction with "specialuse" extension

For servers which also support [@!RFC8579] delivery to special-use mailboxes,
it is an error to specify both ":mailboxid" and ":specialuse" in the same
fileinto command.

Advanced filtering based on both special-use and mailboxid can be
built with explicit "specialuse_exists" and "mailboxidexists" tests.

Note to developers of sieve generation tools: it is advisable to use
special-use rather than mailboxid when creating rules that are based
on a special-use purpose (e.g. delivery directly to the Junk folder
based on a header that was added by a scanning agent earlier in the
mailflow).

# Interaction with "fcc" extension

This document extends the definition of the ":fcc" argument defined in
[@!RFC8580] so that it can optionally be used with the ":mailboxid"
argument.

```
FCC-OPTS =/ [":mailboxid" <mailboxid: string>]
```

If the optional ":mailboxid" argument is specified with ":fcc", it
instructs the Sieve interpreter to check whether a mailbox exists
with the specific mailboxid.  If such a mailbox exists, the generated
message is filed into that mailbox.  Otherwise, the generated message
is filed into the ":fcc" target mailbox.

As with fileinto, it is an error to specify both ":mailboxid"
and ":specialuse" for the same fcc rule.

Example:
```
require ["enotify", "fcc", "mailboxid"];
notify :fcc "INBOX.Sent"
       :mailboxid "F6352ae03-b7f5-463c-896f-d8b48ee3"
       :message "You got mail!"
       "mailto:ken@example.com";
```

# Test "mailboxidexists"

The "mailboxidexists" test is true if all mailboxes listed in the
"mailboxids" argument exist in the mailstore, and each allows the
user in whose context the Sieve script runs to "deliver" messages
into it.  When the mailstore is an IMAP server, "delivery" of
messages is possible if:

a) the READ-WRITE response code is present for the mailbox (see
   Section 7.1 of [@RFC3501]), if IMAP Access Control List (ACL)
   [@RFC4314] is not supported by the server, or

b) the user has 'p' or 'i' rights for the mailbox (see Section 5.2
   of [@RFC4314]).

Note that a successful "mailboxidexists" test for a mailbox doesn't
necessarily mean that a "fileinto :mailboxid" action on this mailbox
would succeed.  For example, the "fileinto" action might put user over
quota.  The "mailboxidexists" test only verifies existence of the
mailbox and whether the user in whose context the Sieve script runs
has permissions to execute "fileinto" on it.

Example:
```
require "fileinto";
require "mailboxid";

if header :contains ["from"] "coyote" {
    if mailboxidexists "F6352ae03-b7f5-463c-896f-d8b48ee3" {
        fileinto :mailboxid "F6352ae03-b7f5-463c-896f-d8b48ee3"
                            "INBOX.name.will.not.be.used";
    } else {
        fileinto "INBOX.harassment";
    }
}
```

Note to implementers: this test behaves identically to the
`mailboxexists` test defined in [@RFC5490] but operates on
mailboxids rather than mailbox names.

# Interaction with variables extension

There is no special interaction defined, however as an objectid
is a string in this document, objectid values can contain
variable expansions if [@RFC5229] is enabled.

# Security considerations

Because mailboxid is always generated by the server, implementations
MUST NOT allow sieve to make an endrun around this protection by
creating mailboxes with the specified ID by using ":create" and
":mailboxid" in a fileinto rule for a non-existant mailbox.

Implementers are referred to the security considerations sections
of [@!RFC5228] and [@!RFC8474].

# IANA considerations

IANA are requested to add a capability to the sieve-extensions registry:

    To: iana@iana.org
    Subject: Registration of new Sieve extension

    Capability name: mailboxid
    Description: adds a test for checking mailbox existence by objectid,
                 and new optional arguments to fileinto and :fcc which
                 allow selecting the destination mailbox by objectid.
    RFC number: this RFC
    Contact address: The EXTRA discussion list <extra@ietf.org>

# Acknowledgements

This document borrows heavily from [@RFC5490] for the matching
mailboxexists test, and from [@RFC8579] for an example of modifying
the fileinto command.

Thanks to Ned Freed and Ken Murchison and Alexey Melnikov for feedback
on the EXTRA mailing list.

# Changes

(EDITOR: remove this section before publication)

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-08

* IETF110 discussion - re-add FCC-OPTS syntax, and clarify that :mailboxid
  is incompatible with :specialuse to parallel the fileinto behaviour

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-07

* Martin Duke review - remove formal section
* Martin Duke review - wording for section 4.1 (interaction with :create)
* Ken Murchison review - fixed :special-use to :specialuse per RFC8579

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-06

* GENART review - fixed example to not be semantically pointless
* GENART review - fixed !@ to @! in RFC reference mmark syntax

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-05

* disallow :mailboxid and :special-use in the same fileinto action.

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-04

* made RFC5490 and RFC8579 normative
* clarified wording based on AD feedback from Barry

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-03

* Fixed ABNF syntax error

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-02

* removed bogus : from "mailboxidexists" test title
* moved FCC to its own top-level section since it is not used
  with the fileinto command.

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-01

* fixed idnits - RFC5228 not mentioned in the abstract
* fixed other I-D references I had missed, oops

## draft-ietf-sieve-mailboxid-00

* Adopted into working group per adoption call on list
* Updated references to old drafts which have since been published.
* Fixed some typoes and simplified some language.
* Removed stray leading colon on mailboxexists (thanks Alexey)
* Added :fcc to the IANA registration description (thanks Alexey)
* Mentioned that variables can be expanded (thanks Alexey)

## draft-gondwana-sieve-mailboxid-02

* Update document date by a couple of years!  Ooops, it got forgotten after
  a WGLC which got not dissent.
* Create xml2rfc v3 output.

## draft-gondwana-sieve-mailboxid-01

* Switch to :mailboxid tagged parameter value with fallback mailbox name.
* Document interaction with "mailbox".
* Document interaction with "special-use".
* Document interaction with "fcc".
* Document security considerations around :mailboxid and :create.

## draft-gondwana-sieve-mailboxid-00

* Initial version.

{backmatter}
